# Usage

## Assembler Options
```none
Syntax: mads source [options]

-b:address      Generate binary file at specific address
-c              Label case sensitivity
-d:label=value  Define a label
-f              CPU command at first column
-fv:value       Set raw binary fill byte to [value]
-hc[:filename]  Header file for CC65
-hm[:filename]  Header file for MADS
-i:path         Additional include directories
-l[:filename]   Generate listing
-m:filename     File with macro definition
-ml:value       margin-left property
-o:filename     Set object file name
-p              Print fully qualified file names in listing and error messages
-s              Silent mode
-t[:filename]   List label table
-u              Warn of unused labels
-vu             Verify code inside unreferenced procedures
-x              Exclude unreferenced procedures
```

The default filenames are:

* `source.lst`
* `source.obx`
* `source.lab`
* `source.h`
* `source.hea`
* `source.mac`

If no extension is provided for the source file, MADS will assume the `.ASM` extension by default.

Parameters can be provided in any order, preceded by the `/` or `-` character; case does not matter. Parameters can be combined, e.g.:

```
mads -lptd:label=value -d:label2=value source.asm
mads -l  -p  -t  source
mads source.asm  -lpt
mads.exe "%1" -ltpi:"d:\!atari\macro\"
mads -i:"c:\atari\macros\" -c source.asm  -lpt
```

By default, **MADS** saves the file with the `.OBX` extension after assembly; this can be changed via a **BAT** file:

```
mads "%1" -o:%~n1.xex
```

More information about operators can be found by executing `CALL /?` from **Microsoft DOS**.

### `b:address`

Using the `-b` switch allows assigning a new assembly address to a file where no assembly address has been specified (the assembly address is defined using the `ORG` pseudo-command).

### `c`

Using the `-c` switch enables case sensitivity for label, variable, and constant names. Assembler directives and *CPU 6502* or *65816* instructions are always recognized regardless of case.

### `d:label=value`

Using the `-d` switch allows defining a new label in **MADS** memory from the command line. The switch can be used multiple times during a single **MADS** invocation and can be useful when assembling using **BAT** batch files.

### `f`

Using the `-f` switch allows placing *CPU* instructions in the first column of a line and ensures they are correctly recognized by the assembler as instructions rather than labels.

### `fv:value`

Using the `-fv:value` switch allows setting the memory fill value when `OPT F+` is used.

### `hc[:filename]`

The `-hc` switch enables saving a header file for the **CC65** compiler. It also allows specifying a new name for the file. The default header filename for **CC65** is `*.H`.

### `hm[:filename]`

The `-hm` switch enables saving a header file for **MADS**. It also allows specifying a new name for the file. The default header filename for **MADS** is `*.HEA`. This file contains information about the banks assigned to labels and their values. Additionally, labels are sorted by type: `CONSTANTS`, `VARIABLES`, and `PROCEDURES`.

### `i:path`

The `-i` switch is used to specify search paths for `ICL` and `INS` operations. The switch can be used multiple times during a single MADS invocation, e.g.:

```
-i:"c:\program files" -i:c:\temp -i:"d:\atari project"
```

### `l:filename`

The `-l` switch enables saving a listing file. It also allows specifying a new name for the file.

### `m:filename`

The `-m` switch is used to specify a file with macro declarations. When used, **MADS** assembles this file before the main `.ASM` file.

### `o:filename`

The `-o` switch allows specifying a new name for the **Atari DOS** or **Atari Sparta DOS X** executable file generated after the assembly process.

### `p`

The `-p` switch is helpful when used with **Code Genie**. If an error occurs during assembly, an appropriate message generated by **MADS** will appear in the *Output Bar* window of the **Code Genie** editor, e.g.:

```
D:\!Delphi\Masm\test.asm (29) ERROR: Missing .PROC
```

Now, simply double-click the line with this message, and the editor's cursor will move to the line with the error.

### `s`

Using the `-s` switch activates "Silent mode," meaning no messages will be displayed except for **ERROR** and **WARNING** messages.

### t[:filename]

The `-t` switch enables saving a file with the label definitions used. It also allows specifying a new name for the file.

### `x`
The `-x` switch allows skipping procedures declared with the `.PROC` directive that have not been referenced in the program during the assembly process.

### `vu`

The `-vu` switch forces an additional code test within `.PROC` blocks even if the `.PROC` block is not saved to the output file; it is most useful when using the `-x` switch.

### `u`

The `-u` switch displays labels that have not been used in the program.

## Exit Codes

```none
3 = bad parameters, assembling not started
2 = error occured
0 = no errors
```

Warning messages do not change the exit code value.

## `LST` File Structure

The listing format does not differ from the one known from **XASM**; the only change is the addition of the virtual memory bank number before the address (provided the bank number is `<> 0`).

```none
3
4 = 01,9033    obraz equ $9033
5 = 01,00A0    scr1 equ $a0
6
7
8 01,2000 EA   main nop
```

## `LAB` File Structure

Similar to **XASM**, the `*.LAB` file stores information about the labels that occurred in the program.

Altogether, there are three columns:

* The first column is the virtual bank number assigned to the label (if the bank is `<> 0`).
* The second column is the label value.
* The third column is the label name.

Virtual bank numbers assigned to a label with values `>= $FFF9` have special meanings:

```none
$FFF9   label of a procedure parameter defined by the .PROC directive
$FFFA   label of an array defined by the .ARRAY directive
$FFFB   label of structural data defined by the DTA STRUCT_LABEL pseudo-command
$FFFC   label of a Sparta DOS X symbol—SMB
$FFFD   label of a macro defined by the .MACRO directive
$FFFE   label of a structure defined by the .STRUCT directive
$FFFF   label of a procedure defined by the .PROC directive
```

Characters with special meanings in label names include:

* a label defined in a macro (double colon) `::`
* the dot `.` character separates the name of a `.MACRO`, `.PROC`, `.LOCAL`, or `.STRUCT` from the field name within the structure.

The numerical value that follows `::` indicates the macro invocation number.

```none
Mad-Assembler v1.4.2beta by TeBe/Madteam
Label table:
00  0400    @STACK_ADDRESS
00  00FF    @STACK_POINTER
00  2000    MAIN
00  2019    LOOP
00  201C    LOOP::1
00  201C    LHEX
00  0080    LHEX.HLP
00  204C    LHEX.THEX
00  205C    HEX
00  205C    HEX.@GETPAR0.LOOP
00  2079    HEX.@GETPAR1.LOOP
```

## `H` File Structure

I'm not sure if everything with this file is OK, but **Eru** wanted something like this, so here it is :) It is meant to be helpful for linking **ASM** with **CC65**, which is the **C** port for the 8-bit **Atari**. Its content might look like this (example `TEST.ASM` file):

```none
#ifndef _TEST_ASM_H_
#define _TEST_ASM_H_

#define TEST_CPU65816 0x200F
#define TEST_CPU6502 0x2017
#define TEST_TEXT6502 0x201F
#define TEST_TEXT65816 0x2024

#endif
```
